.. currentmodule:: artisan



Working with artifacts
======================

An `Artifact` is a typed view into a directory. Creating, accessing, and
modifying an artifact's attributes corresponds to creating, accessing, and
modifying files and subdirectories. By default, simple objects (integers,
floating-point numbers, strings, bytestrings, `True`, `False`, and `None`),
lists, namespaces-like objects, and multidimensional arrays are stored as `CBOR
<https://cbor.io/>`_ files, and path-like objects (including other artifacts)
are stored as symbolic links. Support for additional object and file types can
be added on both a per-class and per-attribute basis.

An example artifact type definition:

.. code:: python3

  import re
  from collections import Counter
  from pathlib import Path
  from typing import Protocol
  from artisan import Artifact

  class BookStats(Artifact):
      ''' A sorted list of the words in a book and
      a corresponding list of occurrence counts. '''

      class Spec(Protocol):
          book: str; 'The path to a text file.'

      def __init__(self, spec: Spec) -> None:
          text = Path(spec.book).read_text()
          counter = Counter(re.findall('\w+', text))
          self.words = sorted(counter.keys()) # creates `words.cbor`
          self.counts = [counter[w] for w in self.words] # creates `counts.cbor`



Creating artifacts
------------------

Instantiating an artifact ensures the corresponding files exist.

.. code:: python3

    from os import listdir
    from types import SimpleNamespace as Ns

    stats = BookStats(Ns(book='The Grammar of Graphics.txt'))
    Path(stats) # => Path('/home/tutorial-author/BookStats_0000')
    listdir(stats) # => ['_meta_.json', 'words.cbor', 'counts.cbor']

However, Artisan will try to avoid rebuilding artifacts it has already created.

.. code:: python3

    BookStats(Ns(book="Why's Poignant Guide.txt")) # creates "BookStats_0001/"
    BookStats(Ns(book="Why's Poignant Guide.txt")) # uses the existing "BookStats_0001/"

When Artisan builds an artifact, it stores metadata in a file called
`_meta_.json`. When an artifact is instantiated, Artisan will search for a
directory with a matching `_meta_.json` file in the :ref:`active context<Working
with contexts>`'s root artifact directory. The search is recursive, but when a
directory with a `_meta_.json` file is found, its subdirectories will not be
searched. If a match is found, that artifact will be returned. Otherwise,
Artisan will invoke the active context's artifact builder to create a new one.
The default artifact builder calls `__init__` and logs metadata to
`_meta_.json`, but custom builders can be used to delegate work to remote
servers or log additional metadata.

.. code:: sh

  > cat BookStats_0000/_meta_.json
  {
    "spec": {
      "type": "BookStats",
      "book": "The Grammar of Graphics.txt"
    },
    "events": [
      {"timestamp": "2020-09-12T05:45:55.372295", "type": "Start"},
      {"timestamp": "2020-09-12T05:45:55.518389", "type": "Success"}
    ]
  }

If the artifact's specification has a `_path_` attribute, the artifact will be
located at that path.

.. code:: python3

    stats = BookStats(Ns(_path_='stats/that-really-long-book', book='Sapiens.txt'))
    stats._path_ # => Path('/home/tutorial-author/stats/that-really-long-book')

Paths can be provided as strings or path-like objects. The "~" character will be
expanded to the home directory and the "@" character will be expanded to the
root artifact directory.



Recovering existing artifacts
-----------------------------

`artisan.recover` can be used to instantiate an artifact from a path rather than
a specification:

.. code:: python3

  artisan.recover(BookStats, 'BookStats_0000') # => <Stats for "The Grammar of Graphics">

The `@` operator works as a shorthand:

.. code:: python3

  # These two expressions are equivalent:
  artisan.recover(BookStats, 'BookStats_0000')
  BookStats @ 'BookStats_0000'



Reading and writing files
-------------------------

When an artifact is writing a file, Artisan tries calling every writer in the
artifact type's `_writers_` list, in order, until one returns successfully.
Writers should accept an extensionless path and a data object, write the data to
the path, and return the appropriate file extension. To support concurrent
reading and writing, files generated by writers are not moved into the
artifact's directory until after the writer returns. For performance, Artisan
may skip writers whose data argument type does not match the object being
stored.

When an artifact is reading a file, Artisan tries calling every reader in the
artifact type's `_readers_` list, in order, until one returns successfully.
Readers should be functions that accept a path and return an object representing
the data stored at that path. For performance, Artisan may skip readers whose
path argument type is annotated with an incompatible extension requirement,
*e.g.* `Annotated[Path, '.txt']` or `Annotated[Path, '.jpg', '.jpeg']`. The
`Annotated` type constructor can be imported from the `typing` module in Python
3.9+ and the `typing_extensions` module in earlier versions.

.. code-block:: python3

  from typing import Annotated
  from .my_lib import AudioClip

  def read_wav(path: Annotated[Path, '.wav']) -> AudioClip:
      return AudioClip.read(path)

  def write_npy(path: Path, clip: AudioClip) -> str:
      clip.write(path)
      return '.wav'

  class MusicBox(Artifact):
      _readers_ = [read_wav, *Artifact._readers_] # Try `read_wav`, then the default readers.
      _writers_ = [write_wav, *Artifact._writers_] # Try `write_wav`, then the default writers.

The default writers include

- `artisan.write_object_as_cbor`, which creates CBOR files, and
- `artisan.write_path`, which creates symbolic links.

The default readers include

- `artisan.read_cbor_file`, which returns a simple object, a namespace, an
  extensible `PersistentList`, or an extensible, lazily loaded
  `PersistentArray`,
- `artisan.read_text_file`, which reads a text file using `Path.read_text`,
- `artisan.read_json_file`, which reads a JSON file using `json.load`,
- `artisan.read_numpy_file`, which reads a NumPy array file or a NumPy archive
  using `numpy.load`, and
- `artisan.read_opaque_file`, which returns an unrecognized file's path so it can
  be read using a function from an appropriate library.

Files can also be written and read directly using an artifacts' `_path_`
attribute:

.. code:: python3

  import pickle

  class PickleJar(Artifact):
      def __init__(self, spec: object) -> None:
          (self._path_ / 'cucumber.pkl').write_bytes(pickle.dumps('🥒'))
          (self / 'pepper.pkl').write_bytes(pickle.dumps('🌶️')) # This also works.

And per-attribute support for file types can be added by defining `properties
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#property>`_ or other
`descriptors <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/descriptor.html>`_:

.. code-block:: python3

  from PIL import Image

  class PictureFrame(Artifact):
      @property
      def picture(self) -> Image:
          return Image.open(self / 'picture.png')



Attribute-access modes
----------------------

Artifacts can be instantiated in "read-sync", "read-async", or "write" mode. In
"read-sync" mode, attribute accesses will only return after the artifact has
finished building. In "read-async" mode, attribute accesses will return as soon
as a corresponding file or directory exists. In "write" mode, attribute accesses
will return immediately, but a `ProxyArtifactField` will be returned if no
corresponding file or directory is present. Additionally, in "write" mode,
attribute assignments will create files.

Artifacts are instantiated in "read-sync" mode by default, but if the artifact's
specification has a `_mode_` attribute, or if a `mode` argument is provided to
`artisan.recover`, that mode will be used instead. Artifacts' `__init__` methods
are always executed in "write" mode, so it is generally only necessary to
specify `_mode_` when "read-async" behavior is desired.

.. code:: python3

  # This raises an `AttributeError`:
  read_sync_artifact = BookStats(Ns(book='Soonish.txt'))
  read_sync_artifact.about # `about` doesn't exist.

  # This works:
  write_artifact = BookStats(Ns(book='Soonish.txt', _mode_='write'))
  write_artifact.about # => <ProxyArtifactField object>
  write_artifact.about.the_author = 'Seems like a pretty nice guy.'
  write_artifact.about.favorite_pages.append('Page 1: The best so far')
  write_artifact.about.favorite_pages.append('Page 2 is also quite good...')
  listdir(write_artifact.about) # => ['the_author.cbor', 'favorite_pages.cbor']



Dynamic artifacts
-----------------

Artisan provides the `DynamicArtifact` class to represent artifacts with
attribute names known only at runtime. `DynamicArtifact` accepts a single type
argument indicating the type of its instances' attributes. Omitting this
argument indicates that the attributes may be of any type.

.. code:: python3

  from artisan import DynamicArtifact
  photos = DynamicArtifact[Path] @ '/opt/paris_photos/' # All attributes are paths.

Dynamic artifacts support `MutableMapping` methods (`__len__`, `__iter__`,
`__contains__`, *etc.*), and item-access syntax can be used to access their
attributes. Key iteration is guaranteed to be alphabetical.

.. code:: python3

  list(photos) # => ['eiffel_tower', 'that_dog_with_the_beret', ...]
  photos['eiffle_tower'] # => Path('/opt/paris_photos/eiffel_tower.png')
